Abstract
Structural information for chemical compounds is often described by pictorial images in most scientific documents, which cannot be easily understood and manipulated by computers. This dilemma makes optical chemical structure recognition (OCSR) an essential tool for automatically mining knowledge from an enormous amount of literature. However, existing OCSR methods fall far short of our expectations for realistic requirements due to their poor recovery accuracy. In this paper, we developed a deep neural network model named ABC-Net (Atom and Bond Center Network) to predict graph structures directly. Based on the divide-and-conquer principle, we propose to model an atom or a bond as a single point in the center. In this way, we can leverage a fully convolutional neural network (CNN) to generate a series of heat-maps to identify these points and predict relevant properties, such as atom types, atom charges, bond types and other properties. Thus, the molecular structure can be recovered by assembling the detected atoms and bonds. Our approach integrates all the detection and property prediction tasks into a single fully CNN, which is scalable and capable of processing molecular images quite efficiently. Experimental results demonstrate that our method could achieve a significant improvement in recognition performance compared with publicly available tools. The proposed method could be considered as a promising solution to OCSR problems and a starting point for the acquisition of molecular information in the literature.
Introduction
For drug-related research, it is essential to collect as much relevant data as possible from the primary scientific literature [1, 2]. However, most scientific publications containing the data related to small molecules do not provide the molecular structures in a computer-readable format (e.g. SMILES (simplified molecular input line entry specification) [3], InChI (international chemical identifier) [4], MOL-file [5], etc.), which can be easily analyzed by computers. Instead, these publications only described molecular structures with graphical images, which cannot be directly interpreted by computers [6]. Consequently, most project-relevant molecules found in publications have to be laboriously collected and curated by hand, which is time-consuming and expensive when the quantity of documents ranges from hundreds of thousands to even millions [1, 7].

To address these issues, various optical chemical structure recognition (OCSR) tools have been developed to automatically recognize chemical structures from raw images [6, 8–12]. To date, these approaches can be mainly divided into two categories: rule-based methods and deep learning-based methods.

Long-term studies have been conducted on ruled-based OSAR tools. The first relatively mature OCSR tool, Kekule [9] was released in 1992 and leveraged a combination of various image processing techniques, optical character recognition and hand-coded rules that laid the foundation for future rule-based methods. Since then, several attempts have been made to improve these rules and offered various OCSR tools, such as OSRA [8], MolVec [10], CLiDE Pro [12], Imago [13] and ChemReader [14]. Rule-based methods typically work by sequentially executing a collection of sophisticated rules designed by experts. These methods require participants to have extensive domain expertise and experience in order to develop a set of rules for potential scenarios. However, there is a wide range of styles and annotations applied in chemical images, and the input quality is not always consistent, which makes it extremely difficult to develop a comprehensive set of manual coding rules for chemical structure recognition. At present, integrated with quite complex rules, rule-based methods still cannot satisfy the requirements of practical applications.

In recent years, the rapidly developing deep learning (DL) methods have achieved impressive success for supervised learning tasks and surpassed traditional expert-system methods in various domains [15, 16]. These data-driven machine learning (ML) approaches can significantly alleviate the reliance on extensive expertise and possess excellent flexibility and scalability for the applications in a wide range of tasks [17–19]. Therefore, several studies have been performed to apply deep neural networks (DNNs) in OCSR [1, 11].

With the advancement of computer vision and machine translation technology [20, 21], it is possible to directly convert images to text by DL methods. In fact, awe-inspiring results have been achieved on automatic image captioning [22, 23]. An image captaining model typically uses a convolutional neural network (CNN) to extract high-level features and a recurrent neural network (RNN) to generate the depicted text. Inspired by this, DECIMER [11], Img2mol [24] and MSE-DUDL [1] have been proposed to generate the SMILES strings directly from chemical structure images by the well-established captioning models. However, this setting is problematic because multiple SMILES strings could present a specific molecule with different forms according to different starting atoms and traversal orders [25]. To solve this dilemma, people have to use the canonical form of SMILES strings as prediction targets [1, 24]. To enable canonical SMILES strings to be produced, a model needs to identify atoms and bonds and arrange atoms in a specific order. These facts greatly increase the recognition difficulty and lead to this type of model being extremely data-inefficient, requiring millions of training data to achieve decent performance. Furthermore, the performance of these models will deteriorate rapidly as the lengths of SMILES strings increase [24].

In this paper, we proposed a much simpler and more efficient solution called ABC-Net (Atom and Bond Center Network) based on the key-point detection technique [26, 27]. In ABC-Net, we represent each atom and bond by a single point in the center. In this way, the detection of atoms and bonds is considered as a standard key-point estimation problem [28]. As shown in Figure 1, a single fully CNN [29] is used to generate a heat-map for atom location centers, a heat-map for bond location centers and a series of property maps for atom and bond property prediction. The peaks in the heat maps correspond to atom or bond centers. Other properties such as atom types, atom charges and bond types, are then predicted directly from the property maps at the detected location. The molecular structure can be restored by assembling the detected atoms and bonds, which can be later translated to any molecular format (e.g. SMILES). The striking feature of the proposed method is that ABC-Net can only use one DNN to make all these predictions, which is very straightforward and efficient. The evaluation results highlight the ground-breaking recognition performance improvement compared with publicly available existing tools.

Materials and methods
Data collection
The data used in this study were collected from the ChEMBL database [30]. We used RDKit to retrieve the canonical SMILES representation. The molecules that RDKit could not successfully process were excluded from the original dataset. More than 50 non-hydrogen atoms in molecules were eliminated since they are difficult to depict in our experimental settings. Then the statistical analysis was executed, and molecules with rare atoms or rare atom charges that appear <1000 were removed. After the washing procedure, we randomly sampled 100 000 chemical compounds in SMILES format in such a way that every atom type and every atom charge is present in at least 1000 chemical compounds. Then these molecules will be depicted in images by cheminformatics toolkits. During the drawing process, we also used cheminformatics software to record the related properties of the atoms and bonds in the molecular images, including the position, category and other properties.

Overall pipeline
As a whole, molecules are infinitely diverse, but the categories of their constituent atoms and bonds are quite limited. Using the divide-and-conquer principle, converting the problem of recognizing molecules into recognizing atoms and bonds will significantly simplify the challenge. The central idea of our framework is to reformulate the chemical structure recognition as a series of pixel-wise prediction problems. Concretely, our system divides the input image into the uniform grids by a fixed stride (the stride is set to 4 in our experiments). Every grid cell is responsible for (i) determining whether it is a bond or atom center and (ii) predicting the relevant properties if it is an object center.

Based on the above idea, the overall OCSR process consists of three core steps, including (A) atom and bond detection, (B) auxiliary information recognition of atoms and bonds and (C) molecular reconstruction (Figure 1A). Based on the above design, we proposed a multi-task learning model called ABC-Net (Figure 1B) to make all the predictions in just one inference. In the model training phase, the atom and bond detection tasks and the other auxiliary property recognition tasks are trained simultaneously using a multi-task training approach. Although in the inference phase, the detection of atoms and bonds is used as a precursor task. The auxiliary properties are only predicted at the candidate location detected in the atom and bond heat-maps (Figure 2A). During training the atom and bond location heat-maps, we greatly reduce the penalty for the first order neighbors of all the positive locations instead of penalizing all the negative locations equally (Figure 2B). The reason is that the true position may be located in the subpixel between the positive location and its negative neighbors due to the discretization error introduced by the down-sampling operation [26, 27]. Therefore, we set all the positive points in the prediction target heat-map to 1, the first order neighbors of all the positive points to 0.95 and the other locations to 0. Notably, bond detection is more complicated since some bonds may intersect with each other. This setting may cause bonds to be missing when two bond centers are too close or even overlap in the heat-map. In molecular images, overlapping bonds must have different directions to be distinguished. Therefore, we group them into 60 categories by dividing 0–360° uniformly into 60 intervals to provide a better distinction. Specifically, we conduct 60 binary classification tasks at one time, after the bond location detection, to determine if there is a bond at a particular angle at the detected position. As shown in Figure 2C, the non-stereo bonds will become the same after rotating 180°. In this way, a non-stereo bond should correspond to two positive angles in the opposite direction. In the inference phase, as shown in Figure 2D, the bonds belonging to certain angle categories are detected by searching local maximum greater than a certain threshold at the detected bond locations. Notably, non-maximum-suppression for the opposite angle is required since there will be two positive responses for the non-stereo bond in the opposite angle, which represents the same bond. After atoms and bonds have been located, the prediction process proceeds to predict a series of property maps for the atoms and bonds that are crucial for molecular structural recovery, including atom type, atom charge, bond type and bond length. Particularly, the number of implicit hydrogens is also quite important when aromatic heterocyclic compounds are depicted in the aromatic form. For example, as shown in Figure 2E, the molecule without implicit hydrogen information can be transformed into two different chemical structures. Therefore, if aromatic heterocyclic compounds are depicted in the aromatized form, the implicit hydrogens for the heteroatoms should be drawn explicitly and the numbers are recorded and need to be predicted. The detailed settings are described in the following part.

Figure 2Graphical core methods and strategies. (A) The atoms and bonds are modeled by their centers, in which a point represents an atom or bond. (B) In the heat map, the center pixel is assigned to the object, and the nearby points have a reduced negative loss. The relevant property will be predicted at the center point as well as the nearby points. (C) A non-stereo bond should correspond to two positive angles, which are in the opposite direction. In comparison, a stereo bond corresponds to only one positive angle. (D) A bond may be there when an angle’s prediction is greater than its neighbors and further greater than a fixed threshold value. Non-maximum-suppression for the opposite angle is required because two positive responses for the non-stereo bond will be in the opposite angle, representing the same bond. (E) In the case of aromatic heterocyclic compounds shown in the aromatized form, the absence of implicit hydrogens for the heteroatoms may result in distinct dearomatized molecular forms. (F) Molecular depiction variants of the same structure that are randomly generated from the SMILES: C[S+]([O−])C[C@H]1O[C@@H](n2cnc3c(N)nc(F)nc32)[C@H](O)[C@@H]1O. The RDKit library generates the first four, and the Indigo library generates the others.
Once we have finished the atom and bond detection, we need a reconstruction algorithm to combine the neural network outputs and build final graph structures. At first, the atom and bond centers can be detected by finding the peak points in the atom and bond heat-maps, respectively. After that, the bonds of different angle categories can be detected at every bond center by finding the local maximum along the angle category axis. This means that if the response of an angle is greater than its neighbors and further greater than a certain threshold, it will be recognized as a bond. Then, the bond length is figured out for the specified bond center and bond angle. Next, for every bond, two atoms connected to this bond can be found according to the bond center location, bond angle and bond length. In this way, the atoms and bonds can be assembled into a molecule graph. As for other atom and bond properties such as atom types and bond types, they can be inferred at the corresponding locations from the atom and bond property prediction maps. It is worth noting that, following a divide-and-conquer strategy, we can generate any form of the final molecular representations because we can collect the most basic molecular components.

The specified network architecture is illustrated in Figure 1B. ABC-Net consists of a contracting path (left side) and an expansive path (right side). The contracting path follows the typical architecture of a CNN and consists of five contracting steps. Every contracting step consists of several conv-blocks followed by a 2 × 2 max pooling operation with stride 2 for down-sampling. The expansive path consists of three expanding steps. Every step in the expansive path consists of a transpose-conv layer that up-samples the feature map and halves the number of feature channels, a concatenation with the corresponding feature map from the contracting path and some conv-blocks. The final feature map does not recover to the original size due to large memory consumption and is already enough for detection in our experiments. In the output layer, for every learning task, a conv-block and a 1 × 1 convolution are used to map each 128-component feature vector in the feature map to the desired number of classes. The contracting and expansive path can extract and utilize features at different scales, which enable our model to handle molecular graphs of different sizes.

The detection tasks of our model, including atom location prediction, bond location prediction and bond angle prediction, are assessed by quantifying two object detection metrics (recall and precision)

To evaluate the final molecular structure recognition performance, we utilized two metrics: accuracy and Tanimoto similarity. Accuracy reports the exact match rate between the input and the generated SMILES (simplified molecular input line entry system) strings. Tanimoto similarity reports the similarity of ECFPs (extended-connectivity fingerprints) 

To train the ABC-Net model, we need 2D images of chemical structures labeled with pixel-wise coordinates and related properties for every atom and bond. This type of dataset is not available to our knowledge, and manually constructing a labeled dataset containing thousands of images is not feasible. Fortunately, two different cheminformatics libraries (RDKit [33] and Indigo [34]) provide some APIs that can be used to label images during drawing. We thus developed a procedure to record the required annotation information at the drawing time automatically. To improve model robustness and prevent overfitting, we further explored different depiction settings: changing the atom label mode, varying bond thickness, varying the molecule’s orientation, changing the aromaticity marker and so on. Figure 2F shows numerous ways in which a single molecule can be represented by those two libraries. In addition, the input resolution was set to 512 × 512 pixels for the convenience of mini-batch training. The image margin was randomly chosen between 10 and 100 pixels to vary the size of the chemical structure.

To build our datasets, we screened 100 000 molecules in the SMILES format from the ChEMBL database in a way that every atom type and every atom charge is present in at least 1000 chemical compounds. The numbers of the non-hydrogen atoms of the screened molecules are distributed between 5 and 50, mainly concentrated between 20 and 30, with an average of 28 (Figure 3A). The distributions of different atom types, bond types and atom charge classes can be found in Figure 3C. Molecules were depicted with molecular images by RDKit and Indigo, respectively. Then we split the RDKit image dataset and Indigo image dataset into three sets (training, validation and test) in the ratio of 8:1:1. Besides, we also constructed a hybrid dataset by combining the RDkit and Indigo datasets together. Removing color information and binarization can effectively conserve molecular structure information and remove interference. Thus, the generated images were converted to gray-scale and further binarized according to a pre-determined threshold.

The performance of individual tasks
In this part, the experiment was performed with the combined dataset containing more molecular image styles, which can better evaluate model performance. As shown in Figure 3A, all the detection and property classification tasks could score above 0.998, and the MAE of the bond length prediction task is <0.1 pixel, clearly demonstrating that our proposed ABC-Net model can achieve excellent performance on every individual task.

However, most of these tasks have a data imbalance problem, in which these results are less convincing for the minority classes in every task. To better evaluate the model performance, we further evaluated the detection and property prediction performance of different classes measured by the precision and recall metrics. The detection precision and recall metrics provide a reliable performance evaluation for each classification by comprehensively considering the location detection and classification tasks. As shown in Figure 3B, the ABC-Net model achieved good performance for different classes of each task. The detection performance of different atoms is >0.98, demonstrating that the model is very effective at finding atom objects. For common bonds, the model performed well but showed a little degradation for stereo-chemical bonds. As for atom charges, the ABC-Net model achieved a very satisfactory performance of over 0.99. Moreover, for every class, the frequency in which it appears in the training data correlates with the corresponding performance.

The overall accuracy of the reconstruction molecules
After training the multi-task ABC-Net, we could combine all the individual task results and evaluate the overall accuracy of the resulting graph predictions. We compared our model with two open-source and publicly available optical molecular recognition systems (i.e. MolVec [10] and OSRA [8]). Both belong to rule-based methods. In addition, one highly competitive and representative DL-based method: Img2mol [24], utilizes data from the same sources as ours, so its results are listed for comparison. Three sets of experiments were conducted to train and evaluate our model (RDKit images alone, Indigo images alone and mixed images). As shown in Table 1, the traditional rule-based method MolVec is quite unsatisfactory, which only achieves a quite low recovery accuracy below 50%. OSAR is slightly better, but the performance is inconsistent, and the best recovery rate is only 61.53%. The DL-based method: Img2mol, can achieve much better results than the rule-based methods. However, Img2mol utilized millions of data for training, which is quite data inefficient. Our method outperforms the other methods by a pretty large margin. The recovery accuracy is consistently achieved at 94–98%, and the Tanimoto similarity is >98%. Considering that our model was trained with only tens of thousands of data, these results fully illustrate that our method is data-efficient and has excellent generalizability.